Concentration is a general measurement unit that reports the amount of
solute present in a known amount of solution
Although we associate the terms “solute” and “solution” with liquid samples,
we can extend their use to gas-phase and solid-phase samples as well. Table
2.4 lists the most common units of concentration.

Both molarity and formality express concentration as moles of solute
per liter of solution; however, there is a subtle difference between them.
Molarity is the concentration of a particular chemical species. Formality,
on the other hand, is a substance’s total concentration without regard
to its specific chemical form. There is no difference between a compound’s
molarity and formality if it dissolves without dissociating into ions. The
formal concentration of a solution of glucose, for example, is the same as
its molarity.

For a compound that ionizes in solution, such as CaCl2, molarity and
formality are different. When we dissolve 0.1 moles of CaCl2 in 1 L of
water, the solution contains 0.1 moles of Ca2+ and 0.2 moles of Cl–. The
molarity of CaCl2, therefore, is zero since there is no undissociated CaCl2
in solution; instead, the solution is 0.1 M in Ca2+ and 0.2 M in Cl–. The
formality of CaCl2, however, is 0.1 F since it represents the total amount
of CaCl2 in solution. This more rigorous definition of molarity, for better
or worse, largely is ignored in the current literature, as it is in this textbook.
When we state that a solution is 0.1 M CaCl2 we understand it to consist of
Ca2+ and Cl– ions. We will reserve the unit of formality to situations where
it provides a clearer description of solution chemistry.

Molarity is used so frequently that we use a symbolic notation to simplify
its expression in equations and in writing. Square brackets around a
species indicate that we are referring to that species’ molarity. Thus, [Ca2+]
is read as “the molarity of calcium ions.”

Normality is a concentration unit no longer in common use; however,
because you may encounter normality in older handbooks of analytical
methods, it is helpful to understand its meaning. Normality defines concentration
in terms of an equivalent, which is the amount of one chemical
species that reacts stoichiometrically with another chemical species. Note
that this definition makes an equivalent, and thus normality, a function of
the chemical reaction in which the species participates. Although a solution
of H2SO4 has a fixed molarity, its normality depends on how it reacts. You
will find a more detailed treatment of normality in Appendix 1.

Molality is used in thermodynamic calculations where a temperature independent
unit of concentration is needed. Molarity is based on the volume
of solution that contains the solute. Since density is a temperature dependent
property, a solution’s volume, and thus its molar concentration, changes
with temperature. By using the solvent’s mass in place of the solution’s
volume, the resulting concentration becomes independent of temperature.

Weight percent (% w/w), volume percent (% v/v) and weight-to-
volume percent (% w/v) express concentration as the units of solute present
in 100 units of solution. A solution that is 1.5% w/v NH4NO3, for
example, contains 1.5 gram of NH4NO3 in 100 mL of solution.

Parts per million (ppm) and parts per billion (ppb) are ratios that
give the grams of solute in, respectively, one million or one billion grams
of sample. For example, a sample of steel that is 450 ppm in Mn contains
450 μg of Mn for every gram of steel. If we approximate the density of an
aqueous solution as 1.00 g/mL, then we can express solution concentrations
in ppm or ppb using the following relationships.

For gases a part per million usually is expressed as a volume ratio; for example,
a helium concentration of 6.3 ppm means that one liter of air contains
6.3 μL of He.

The most common ways to express concentration in analytical chemistry
are molarity, weight percent, volume percent, weight-to-volume percent,
parts per million and parts per billion. The general definition of concentration
in equation 2.1 makes it is easy to convert between concentration units.

Sometimes it is inconvenient to use the concentration units in Table 2.4.
For example, during a chemical reaction a species’ concentration may
change by many orders of magnitude. If we want to display the reaction’s
progress graphically we might wish to plot the reactant’s concentration as a
function of the volume of a reagent added to the reaction. Such is the case in
Figure 2.2 for the titration of HCl with NaOH. The y-axis on the left-side
of the figure displays the [H+] as a function of the volume of NaOH. The
initial [H+] is 0.10 M and its concentration after adding 80 mL of NaOH
is 4.3 × 10-13 M. We easily can follow the change in [H+] for the first 14
additions of NaOH; however, for the remaining additions of NaOH the
change in [H+] is too small to see.

When working with concentrations that span many orders of magnitude,
it often is more convenient to express concentration using a p-function.
The p-function of X is written as pX and is defined as
The pH of a solution that is 0.10 M H+, for example, is
and the pH of 4.3 × 10–13 M H+ is
Figure 2.2 shows that plotting pH as a function of the volume of NaOH
provides more useful information about how the concentration of H+
changes during the titration.
