The array of equipment available for making analytical measurements and
working with analytical samples is impressive, ranging from the simple
and inexpensive, to the complex and expensive. With three exceptions—
the measurement of mass, the measurement of volume, and the drying of
materials—we will postpone the discussion of equipment to later chapters
where its application to specific analytical methods is relevant.

An object’s mass is measured using a digital electronic analytical balance
(Figure 2.3).2 An electromagnet levitates the sample pan above a permanent
cylindrical magnet. When we place an object on the sample pan, it displaces
the sample pan downward by a force equal to the product of the sample’s
mass and its acceleration due to gravity. The balance detects this downward
movement and generates a counterbalancing force by increasing the current
to the electromagnet. The current needed to return the balance to its
original position is proportional to the object’s mass. A typical electronic
balance has a capacity of 100–200 g, and can measure mass to the nearest
±0.01 mg to ±1 mg.

If the sample is not moisture sensitive, a clean and dry container is
placed on the balance. The container’s mass is called the tare and most
balances allow you to set the container’s tare to a mass of zero. The sample
is transferred to the container, the new mass is measured and the sample’s
mass determined by subtracting the tare. A sample that absorbs moisture
from the air is treated differently. The sample is placed in a covered weighing
bottle and their combined mass is determined. A portion of the sample is
removed and the weighing bottle and the remaining sample are reweighed.
The difference between the two masses gives the sample’s mass.

Several important precautions help to minimize errors when we determine
an object’s mass. To minimize the effect of vibrations, the balance is
placed on a stable surface and in a level position. Because the sensitivity
of an analytical balance is sufficient to measure the mass of a fingerprint,
materials often are handled using tongs or laboratory tissues. Volatile liquid
samples must be weighed in a covered container to avoid the loss of sample
by evaporation. To minimize fluctuations in mass due to air currents, the
balance pan often is housed within a wind shield, as seen in Figure 2.3.
A sample that is cooler or warmer than the surrounding air will create a
convective air currents that affects the measurement of its mass. For this
reason, bring your samples to room temperature before determining their
mass. Finally, samples dried in an oven are stored in a desiccator to prevent
them from reabsorbing moisture from the atmosphere.

Analytical chemists use a variety of glassware to measure volume, including
graduated cylinders, volumetric pipets, and volumetric flasks. The choice of
what type of glassware to use depends on how accurately and how precisely
we need to know the sample’s volume and whether we are interested in
containing or delivering the sample.

A graduated cylinder is the simplest device for delivering a known
volume of a liquid reagent (Figure 2.4). The graduated scale allows you to
deliver any volume up to the cylinder’s maximum. Typical accuracy is ±1%
of the maximum volume. A 100-mL graduated cylinder, for example, is
accurate to ±1 mL.

A Volumetric pipet provides a more accurate method for delivering
a known volume of solution. Several different styles of pipets are available,
two of which are shown in Figure 2.5. Transfer pipets provide the most accurate
means for delivering a known volume of solution. A transfer pipet
delivering less than 100 mL generally is accurate to the hundredth of a mL.
Larger transfer pipets are accurate to a tenth of a mL. For example, the 10-
mL transfer pipet in Figure 2.5 will deliver 10.00 mL with an accuracy of
±0.02 mL.

To fill a transfer pipet, use a rubber suction bulb to pull the solution
up past the calibration mark (Never use your mouth to suck a solution into a
pipet!). After replacing the bulb with your finger, adjust the solution’s level
to the calibration mark and dry the outside of the pipet with a laboratory
tissue. Allow the pipet’s contents to drain into the receiving container with
the pipet’s tip touching the inner wall of the container. A small portion of
the liquid remains in the pipet’s tip and is not be blown out. With some
measuring pipets any solution remaining in the tip must be blown out.

Delivering microliter volumes of liquids is not possible using transfer
or measuring pipets. Digital micropipets (Figure 2.6), which come in a
variety of volume ranges, provide for the routine measurement of microliter
volumes.

Graduated cylinders and pipets deliver a known volume of solution. A
volumetric flask, on the other hand, contains a specific volume of solution
(Figure 2.7). When filled to its calibration mark, a volumetric flask
that contains less than 100 mL generally is accurate to the hundredth of a
mL, whereas larger volumetric flasks are accurate to the tenth of a mL. For
example, a 10-mL volumetric flask contains 10.00 mL ± 0.02 mL and a
250-mL volumetric flask contains 250.0 mL ± 0.12 mL.

Because a volumetric flask contains a solution, it is used to prepare a
solution with an accurately known concentration. Transfer the reagent to
the volumetric flask and add enough solvent to bring the reagent into solution.
Continuing adding solvent in several portions, mixing thoroughly
after each addition, and then adjust the volume to the flask’s calibration
mark using a dropper. Finally, complete the mixing process by inverting
and shaking the flask at least 10 times.

If you look closely at a volumetric pipet or a volumetric flask you will
see markings similar to those shown in Figure 2.8. The text of the markings,
which reads

10 mL T. D. at 20 oC ± 0.02 mL

indicates that the pipet is calibrated to deliver (T. D.) 10 mL of solution
with an uncertainty of ±0.02 mL at a temperature of 20 oC. The temperature
is important because glass expands and contracts with changes in
temperatures; thus, the pipet’s accuracy is less than ±0.02 mL at a higher
or a lower temperature. For a more accurate result, you can calibrate your
volumetric glassware at the temperature you are working by weighing the
amount of water contained or delivered and calculating the volume using
its temperature dependent density.

You should take three additional precautions when you work with pipets
and volumetric flasks. First, the volume delivered by a pipet or contained
by a volumetric flask assumes that the glassware is clean. Dirt and
grease on the inner surface prevent liquids from draining evenly, leaving
droplets of liquid on the container’s walls. For a pipet this means the delivered
volume is less than the calibrated volume, while drops of liquid above
the calibration mark mean that a volumetric flask contains more than its
calibrated volume. Commercially available cleaning solutions are available
for cleaning pipets and volumetric flasks.

Second, when filling a pipet or volumetric flask the liquid’s level must
be set exactly at the calibration mark. The liquid’s top surface is curved into
a meniscus, the bottom of which should align with the glassware’s calibration
mark (Figure 2.9). When adjusting the meniscus, keep your eye in line
with the calibration mark to avoid parallax errors. If your eye level is above
the calibration mark you will overfill the pipet or the volumetric flask and
you will underfill them if your eye level is below the calibration mark.

Finally, before using a pipet or volumetric flask rinse it with several small
portions of the solution whose volume you are measuring. This ensures the
removal of any residual liquid remaining in the pipet or volumetric flask.

Many materials need to be dried prior to their analysis to remove residual
moisture. Depending on the material, heating to a temperature between
110 oC and 140 oC usually is sufficient. Other materials need much higher
temperatures to initiate thermal decomposition.

Conventional drying ovens provide maximum temperatures of 160 oC
to 325 oC, depending on the model. Some ovens include the ability to
circulate heated air, which allows for a more efficient removal of moisture
and shorter drying times. Other ovens provide a tight seal for the door,
which allows the oven to be evacuated. In some situations a microwave oven
can replace a conventional laboratory oven. Higher temperatures, up to as
much as 1700 oC, require a muffle furnace (Figure 2.10).

After drying or decomposing a sample, it is cooled to room temperature
in a desiccator to prevent the readsorption of moisture. A desiccator (Figure
2.11) is a closed container that isolates the sample from the atmosphere.
A drying agent, called a desiccant, is placed in the bottom of the container.
Typical desiccants include calcium chloride and silica gel. A perforated
plate sits above the desiccant, providing a shelf for storing samples. Some
desiccators include a stopcock that allows them to be evacuated.
